I think all of us have had
very interesting experiences with young ones,
and we could go on quite a while
speaking about them.
But there is a story
about a “child psychologist
“who began his practice with four theories
“and no children. . . .
“Some years later he found
that he had four children
and no theories!”
He learned that there was quite a bit to do.
There was a lot to do to raise a child.
It was far more than just a few theories.
And this was a comment that was reported
by psychologist Bruce Narramore
and published in the Awake!
of April 8, 1981.
So theories about child raising come and go,
and the best counsel on raising a child,
of course, is found in the Bible.
We know that, because it’s been there
for thousands of years,
and it’s consistent.
It’s consistently successful.
There’s another interesting point
that there is four times as much counsel
given to children in the book of Proverbs
as given to adults.
That might surprise you,
but that’s what I read, so I believe it.
Proverbs 22:6 is a familiar scripture
for all of us.
Proverbs 22:6, and here it says:
“Train a boy in the way he should go;
even when he grows old
he will not depart from it.”
Is that true?
Yes, it’s true.
Does it mean that in every case
a boy that’s well-trained by his parents
won’t depart from it?
No.
It does not mean that.
It’s giving a general, overall view
of what will take place
if a child is trained properly
by his parents.
And what it is,
this is an interesting brief statement
from The Watchtower  of 2008, April 1st
that if a child is trained
according to the Bible’s counsel,
the parent or parents “are creating
“the most favorable circumstances
to bring about a marvelous result.”
That marvelous result is
a faithful servant of Jehovah God.
And we can turn to Proverbs 23:24
where reference is made to that
—Proverbs 23:24.
And how many parents are so delighted
with their children,
especially in the case of so many
who are serving at Bethel!
There at Proverbs 23:24, it says:
“The father of a righteous one
will surely be joyful;
whoever fathers a wise son
will rejoice in him.”
And it does; it brings great pleasure
to parents when that happens.
But there’s another side to the coin.
Despite the most earnest efforts of parents,
some children do become unfaithful.
Think about Solomon.
He wasn’t a child, but actually,
it’s very difficult to understand
how that man turned away from Jehovah
in his old age, but he did.
And then even Jehovah had sons
who proved unfaithful.
That’s what the June 1, 2007, Watchtower
showed clearly,
and we’re all familiar with it
—the angels who turned away
from their Father, their Creator.
And something to keep in mind
for parents, particularly,
who have really tried hard
to raise their children properly,
we don’t want to see them
beat themselves figuratively speaking,
on and on for years and years
because they feel like they’re failures.
They should not do that.
How do you account
—if it seems to some parents
that know somehow they failed—
Well then, how do you account for children
who receive no help whatsoever
from their parents
and they love Jehovah
and they come into the truth?
It’s heart—heart condition.
So parents would be wise
to focus on the future and what they can do,
not to look back and beat themselves
over problems of the past.
And even when children do turn aside
from serving Jehovah,
parents who have
conscientiously trained their children
in the way to walk,
they can still entertain the hope
that those young ones
will come back some day.
We never give up on our kids.
We don’t give up
on our close friends or siblings
who may have walked away from the truth.
We always hope that they’ll come back.
Psalm 19:7 is interesting
—Psalm 19:7—
speaking of the reminders of Jehovah.
There it reads: “The law of Jehovah
is perfect, restoring strength.”
And then it says:
“The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy,
making the inexperienced one wise.”
Well, for those who leave the truth,
many times it’s reminders
that come back to them
—the way it was at home,
the counsel they received from their parents,
the loving congregation that they attended.
And who comes to mind when you think
about the reminders coming to mind
after living a life of debauchery?
The prodigal son.
He was at his lowest,
and then who did he remember?
His father
—his father, who undoubtedly had shown
kindness and love to him.
So we don’t want to overlook
the power there is in parental training.
Even though they may not respond
—children may not respond—
immediately,
they do many times later on.
And they go through experiences in life,
sometimes,
that wake them up
to the facts of life and reality.
The truth is there are
thousands upon thousands
of children of Jehovah’s Witnesses
who are being raised in the truth
and whose way “is pure and right.”
It really is thrilling to see young ones
who are able to think.
They don’t just parrot
what their parents tell them.
They’re not just memorizing things.
They’ve learned to have thinking ability,
and they can speak about the truth.
They defend the truth
in a very interesting way.
In Britain, Tim and Sam, both 11 years old
and unbaptized publishers,
were engaging in field service
with Tim’s mother.
The boys needed new bags
to carry their Bibles and literature,
but money was a problem.
Earlier, before starting
in the field service that day,
the mothers of the two publishers
made this a subject of prayer.
At the last house to be visited that morning,
Tim spoke to the householder
and read a Bible verse to her.
She interrupted him
to ask what his religion was.
When Tim replied
that he was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
the woman scolded him
and said to his mother
that she could not understand
why Jehovah’s Witnesses
let their children die
rather than allow them
to accept blood transfusions.
Now, that would be a difficult thing
to have thrown in your face
for a young man there at the door
with his mother.
Tim’s mother suggested
that the woman ask the boys
how they felt about this.
She did.
Tim explained that he would always choose
alternative treatment
rather than go against
his Bible-trained conscience.
This was from this young boy himself.
Sam then said, the other young boy,
that his own sister
had received alternative treatment
and had fared better
than patients who had received blood.
Then the householder
again turned to Tim’s mother,
and this time she expressed disapproval
of taking young children from door to door.
We’ve heard that many times, I’m sure.
Both of the boys responded to the woman
on this occasion
that they enjoyed preaching,
adding that they preferred this
to roaming the streets
like others of their age.
Well, this slowed the householder down a bit.
She was impressed by their reply.
The householder asked the boys
to wait a moment
while she went into her house.
What a surprise they had when she returned
and presented each of them
with a smart, new, leather bag
ideal for their ministry!
She sold these items for a living.
Her changed attitude also allowed the boys
to arrange for a return visit.
And as they were leaving,
the householder’s 94-year-old mother,
who had been listening,
came to the door and asked Tim’s mother
to visit her at her home.
Truly, we are proud of our young ones.
And it’s a delight when you hear them
make comments at the meetings
in their own words
and when you are out
in the field ministry with them
and you see them make expressions of faith.
We have thousands upon thousands
of good children
who really are showing that they’re mature
and that they love Jehovah God.